# aqua-30mff
## Description
This is a site I made to showcase our short film we made as part of the 2022 30 Minute Film Festival for the class Communications Lab. 
Our film, titled "Aqua", aimed to draw attention to an often underappreciated resource, water, and how it is a vital part of our daily lives. In a way, a big part of our message was on staying hydrated, which is especially important during this pandemic to reduce the risk of getting infected and, in the case of infection, lessen symptoms. An interesting feature of our film was its dichotomous nature: there is a dichotomy between the comedic and the serious beats and another between the voiced and the silent beats. This serves as a good metaphor for the shifting nature of water itself. 
To showcase our film, I wanted to make a website that would have a playful yet serious atmosphere, similar to the film itself. For this reason, I went with a bright color palette and used the relatively rounded Verdana font as my primary website font. The specific color palette of ribbon blue and lime green was in fact inspired by the color scheme of Arwa water bottles, a common bottled water brand in the UAE.
The user interactivity comes in the form of a button that scrolls to the top of the page.

## Process
### Wireframe
The first thing I did was to create a <a href="wireframe.pdf"> basic wireframe </a> of how I envisioned the website to look using Adobe XD and Microsoft Paint 3D. A lot of the elements I initially had in mind did make their way into the final website, although some elements saw major changes to make it easier for me to design the page. This was also the stage where I decided upon the color scheme, and to a large extent, the font. Also, while I considered making separate pages for each section, I finally went with a simple scrolling webpage.
### HTML and CSS
After wireframing, I began placing the HTML tags in a way that mostly resembled the wireframe. I also began styling in CSS as I added markup to my index.html file, so that I would always be able to see the look of my page and modify the HTML or CSS as necessary. 
At this point, I decided on the exact hex values for the color scheme, and selected Verdana as the primary font, followed by other common Sans Serif fonts like Trebuchet MS, and Tahoma. I also slightly increased the font sizes in the menus (navigation bar and footer) and in the paragraph tags. I also used CSS to add smooth scrolling to the page to make internal linking less clunky.
The hardest part was creating and centering the navigation bar. The navigation bar is, in essence, an unordered list that was stylized to display each item in the same line without bullet points. Padding was added to provide a hitbox to make it easier to click on each item in the navigation bar. A challenge faced here was that the listed items often refused to be centered, probably due to the unequal length of items. This was solved with the help of the CSS flexbox property. I also added a media query so that the navigation bar transformed into a menu of multiple rows on smaller devices. Flexbox was also helpful for adjusting this.
For the footer, I basically reused the same objects to make it easier to format. However, a formatting bug in "Site by Amiteash Paul" would crop up on hovering over the other links, which was solved by assigning an empty link to that item and removing most link-associated properties like the cursor change using CSS.
In addition to the Navigation Bar, Media Queries were also used for the Page Logo and Scroll to Top Button to make them responsive to change in screen size. Changes in the size of text content on smaller devices were controlled by the viewport meta tag in HTML. Finally, I tried defining most sizes as percentages so that they could smoothly scale with the screen size.
Centering many of the other components was also challenging, and these were solved using a combination of absolute and relative positioning with an overflow-x property to stop horizontal scrolling.
Another challenge was that there was an empty margin around the page. This was solved using the CSS reset on the suggestion of the Professor.
There was also a challenge with using the button tag for my Scroll to Top Button due to the need for fixed positioning. Instead, I used a transparent image to make the button, with JavaScript controlling the behavior (explained in next section).
### JavaScript
For the interactivity component using JavaScript, I had originally thought of using some photo gallery, but this quickly proved to be well beyond my current skill level. I decided on making a "Scroll to Top" button that would fade in and out based on screen position instead. While my original script directly affected the DOM, I found that this transition was not smooth, so I shifted to an opacity-based model while also resetting link behavior using pointerEvents, so that the button could turn visible and invisible through a smooth fade transition whose properties were controlled by CSS. I also used JavaScript to make it so that clicking the button would scroll to the top of the page, although I could have alternatively used HTML internal links. While I wanted to make the button glow using mouseenter and mouseleave Events, I found that it was easier to do this using CSS' :hover selector. My main challenge with JavaScript was the very steep learning curve, especially due to the challenging syntax. However, the lecture and tutorials from W3Schools were very helpful in developing an understanding for the syntax.
### Media
For the website logo, I used the Adobe Creative Cloud Express logo maker tool, which allowed me to quickly design a logo based on certain keywords and elements I wanted. When I was happy with a logo idea, I exported it to Microsoft Paint 3D to change the colors according to my website theme.
The Scroll to Top button was a generic clipart I found on Google Images, which I later colorized using Paint 3D.
The video was made by our team within the class itself, and the Professor helped with encoding it for hosting on a website.
### Testing
Testing the website by reloading both locally on the computer as well as by pushing to GitHub and accessing the page from my phone was an important part of the design process. This allowed me to fine-tune elements to make them appear reasonably well when hosted online.

## Reflection
I am really happy with how my website turned out, and I feel that the theme complements the video well. I am delighted with how my page looks on mobile phones (at least larger ones), especially considering that it did not require to learn too much other than CSS media queries and setting percentage values for all sizes. While the navigation bar was painful to code for, I do like how it turned out as well. I also like how there's not too much information on the page, so the video has the primary focus.
At the same time, I feel there could be several improvements. The primary one would be to optimize my CSS as I often have defined very similar properties on the same object multiple times, and property inheritance still confuses me. I would have also liked to add more JS-based interactivity, although I have to become more proficient before I can tackle that. I could also work on optimizing my web design on mobile phones as currently, many of the buttons are a bit small, and the video viewport itself is a bit too small for comfort. With more HTML, CSS, and JavaScript experience, I could also work on creating menus that fold back into hamburger buttons, so that they take less space on screen, which is especially important on smaller devices. 
However, I am very happy with the progress I have made in this class already, as I had started off with only a moderate level of understanding in HTML, and zero knowledge at all of CSS or JavaScript. I am looking forward to learning more and using the web to tell creative stories.
